UNIT 1
This module introduces Eventstream in Microsoft Fabric, a feature within Real-Time
Intelligence designed to manage data in motion without writing code.
Key Capabilities
● Capture & Route: Effortlessly collect real-time events and direct them to various
destinations.
● No-Code Transformation: Use a drag-and-drop interface to process and transform
data logic visually.
● Versatile Connectivity: IngeAzure IoT Hubst data from diverse sources including:
○ Azure Event Hubs
●
○ Apache Kafka
Objective
The primary goal of the Eventstream module is to teach users how to build end-to-end
pipelines that ingest, transform, and store real-time data for advanced analysis.
UNIT 2 Components of Eventstream
The Eventstream feature in Microsoft Fabric is a no-code, visual solution for building
real-time data pipelines. It acts as a delivery mechanism that captures events as they
happen and routes them to specific locations for analysis or action.
The system is built around three core components:
1. Sources
These are the origins of your data. You can ingest real-time events from both Microsoft
sources and non-Microsoft platforms.
2. Transformations
Before the data reaches its destination, you can reshape it using a drag-and-drop canvas.
Available operations include:
● Filtering and Aggregating data.
● Grouping (e.g., summing values by a specific category).
● Using SQL code for complex logic.
● Joining or expanding fields.

-- 51 of 118 --

3. Destinations
This is where the processed data is sent for storage or further use. Common destinations
include:
● Eventhouse or Lakehouse tables.
● Fabric Activator (to trigger automated actions based on the data).
● Custom endpoints or derived streams for additional processing.
Unit 3 Eventstream sources and destinations
This unit covers the configuration of sources and destinations within a Microsoft Fabric
Eventstream, highlighting how data flows from external origins to actionable endpoints.
1. Eventstream Sources
You can ingest real-time data from a variety of platforms using the eventstream canvas:
● Microsoft Sources: Azure Event Hubs, IoT Hubs, Service Bus, and CDC feeds.
● Fabric/Azure Events: Changes in OneLake data stores or Blob Storage events.
● External Sources: Popular third-party platforms like Apache Kafka, Google Cloud
Pub/Sub, and MQTT.
2. Eventstream Destinations
Once data is ingested (and optionally transformed), it can be routed to multiple endpoints
simultaneously:

-- 52 of 118 --

● Eventhouse: For high-speed ingestion and analysis using KQL.
● Lakehouse: Converts events into Delta Lake format for storage in lakehouse tables.
● Fabric Activator: Triggers automated actions (like notifications or workflows) based
on specific data patterns.
● Derived Stream: Acts as a "sub-stream" to enable content-based routing, allowing
you to send different subsets of data to different destinations.
● Custom Endpoint: Routes data to external systems or custom applications outside
of Fabric.
Unit 4 Eventstream transformations
This unit focuses on Eventstream transformations, which allow you to clean, enrich, and
reshape raw streaming data before it reaches its final destination.
Why Transform Data?
Raw data is rarely "analysis-ready." Transformations help achieve:
● Data Quality: Filtering out noise or incomplete records.
● Enrichment: Adding calculated fields or renaming columns for clarity.
● Standardization: Ensuring consistent formats across different data sources.
● Summarization: Calculating averages or totals over specific time windows.
No-Code Transformation Tools
The eventstream canvas provides several drag-and-drop tiles to process data:
● Filter: Keeps only the events that meet specific conditions (e.g., Temperature >
80°).
● Manage Fields: Used to add, remove, rename, or change the data type of columns.
● Aggregate: Calculates values like Sum, Min, Max, or Average in real-time as
events arrive.
● Group By: Performs aggregations over specific time intervals, such as Tumbling
windows (fixed blocks) or Sliding windows (overlapping intervals).
● Union & Join: Combines multiple streams into one or matches data from two
different streams based on a shared key.
● Expand: Breaks down arrays into individual rows.

-- 53 of 118 --

Create Real-Time Dashboards

-- 54 of 118 --

Unit 1 Introduction
The Core Purpose
The primary goal of Real-Time Dashboards is to monitor constantly changing data to
enable immediate operational decisions. Unlike traditional reporting tools that provide
historical snapshots, these dashboards are designed for high-frequency refreshing.
Key Technical Components
● Data Source: The dashboards connect to KQL databases located in eventhouses.
● Visualizations: They display data through visualizations that refresh automatically to
reflect the most current information available.
● Use Case Example: The unit uses a bike-sharing company as an example, where
an analyst needs to monitor live bike availability and dock capacity to redistribute
bikes to high-demand areas effectively.
Comparison: Traditional vs. Real-Time
Feature 	Traditional Reports 	Real-Time Dashboards
Data Focus 	Historical snapshots 	Current, live data streams
Refresh Rate Scheduled/Infrequent 	High-frequency/Automatic
User Action 	Long-term trend analysis 	Immediate operational response
Unit 2 - Real-time dashboards
Unit 3 of the Create Real-Time Dashboards with Microsoft Fabric module focuses on
Organizing and Filtering Dashboard Data.
Building on the basic tile creation from Unit 2, this section covers how to make your
dashboards scalable and interactive. Here are the core highlights:
1. Base Queries
To make your dashboard more efficient and easier to maintain, you can use Base Queries.
● Efficiency: Instead of writing the same KQL code in every tile, you create a single
"source" query.

-- 55 of 118 --

● Consistency: Multiple tiles (e.g., a map and a bar chart) can reference this base
query, ensuring they all use the exact same filtered dataset.
● Variable usage: Once defined, you reference it in individual tiles like a variable (e.g.,
base_bike_data).
2. Parameters
Parameters add interactivity for the end-user.
● Dynamic Filtering: You can add dropdowns or text boxes (like a "Neighborhood"
selector) to the dashboard toolbar.
● KQL Integration: These parameters are injected into your Kusto queries using the
$parameter_name syntax, allowing the visuals to update instantly based on user
selection.
3. Multi-Page Layouts
For complex monitoring needs, you can organize tiles across multiple pages.
● This prevents "dashboard clutter" and allows you to group related metrics (e.g., one
page for "Live Availability" and another for "Technical Health").
Key Summary Table
Feature 	Primary Benefit
Base Queries Simplifies maintenance; reduces redundant code across tiles.
Parameters 	Enables end-users to slice and dice data without editing queries.
Pages 	Organizes content for better readability and logical grouping.
Unit 3 Organize and filter dashboard data
This unit details how to Organize and filter dashboard data within Microsoft Fabric to
create more effective and interactive Real-Time Dashboards.
Key Features for Dashboard Organization

-- 56 of 118 --

● Pages: You can add multiple pages to a single dashboard to serve as containers for
different sets of tiles. This is useful for grouping related content, such as separating
data by source or subject area.
● Parameters: These add flexibility by allowing users to filter the data displayed in tiles
(e.g., filtering by time period or a specific subset of data).
○ Variables: Parameters use a variable name with an underscore prefix (e.g.,
_selected_neighbourhoods).
○ KQL Integration: You reference these variables directly in your Kusto Query
Language (KQL) code to make tiles dynamic based on user selection.
● Auto Refresh: This feature ensures the dashboard updates automatically without
manual reloads.
○ Editors can set default and minimum refresh rates to manage system
performance.
○ Viewers can adjust the rate during their specific session within the limits set
by the editor.
Unit 3 Dashboard management and
optimization
This unit, Dashboard management and optimization, focuses on improving the efficiency
and maintainability of your Microsoft Fabric dashboards using Base Queries.
The Power of Base Queries
Instead of writing a unique, heavy query for every single tile, you can create a single
"source" query that handles the bulk of the data retrieval.
● Efficiency: It prevents duplicating the same logic across multiple tiles.
● Performance: It reduces the load on your KQL database by fetching a general set of
records once and then letting individual tiles filter that specific subset.
● Maintenance: If you need to change the data source or a core filter, you only have to
update the base query in one place rather than editing every tile.
How It Works
1. Define the Base: You create a query in the dashboard's "Base queries" menu and
assign it a variable name (e.g., _base_bike_data).
2. The Logic: This query usually fetches a broad set of data, such as:
3. Code snippet
Bikes
| where ingestion_time() between (ago(30min) .. now())
| summarize latest_observation = arg_max(ingestion_time(), *) by Neighbourhood

-- 57 of 118 --

4. The Reference: You then create individual tiles that start with that variable name
instead of the raw table:
5. Code snippet
_base_bike_data
| project Neighbourhood, latest_observation, No_Bikes
Summary of Benefits
Feature 	Benefit
Logic Reuse 	Write once, use across many visuals.
Variable Mapping 	Use simple names like _base_data to keep tile code clean.
Optimization 	Faster dashboard loading by streamlining how data is pulled.

-- 58 of 118 --

Use Activator in Microsoft Fabric

-- 59 of 118 --

Unit 1 Use Activator in Microsoft Fabric
This unit introduces Activator, a real-time event detection and rules engine within Microsoft
Fabric designed to trigger automated actions based on live data patterns.
Core Functionality
Activator operates through a three-step process:
1. Connect: Link to real-time data sources (e.g., streaming sensor data).
2. Monitor: Create rules to evaluate specific conditions or thresholds.
3. Act: Execute actions when conditions are met, such as sending notifications or
starting automated workflows.
Key Action Types
● Notifications: Email alerts or Microsoft Teams messages.
● Workflows: Triggering Power Automate flows.
● Automation: Running Microsoft Fabric notebooks to process data or adjust systems.
Real-World Applications
Activator is used across various industries where "time-to-response" is critical:
● Manufacturing: Alerting teams when equipment exceeds safe temperatures.
● Logistics: Monitoring cold-chain integrity for sensitive goods (like medicine).
● Retail: Automating inventory reorders when stock hits a critical low.
● Finance: Flagging unusual transaction patterns for immediate fraud review.
Unit 2 Configure Activator for your data
Unit 2 focuses on how to configure Activator to interpret real-time data by organizing it into
meaningful business entities.
The Business Object Model
To monitor data effectively, Activator uses a hierarchy to bridge the gap between raw data
streams and real-world entities:
● Objects: Represent individual real-world instances (e.g., a specific package, a
delivery truck, or a customer).
● Properties: The specific attributes of that object that you want to track (e.g.,
temperature, current city, or hours in transit).

-- 60 of 118 --

