

-- 41 of 118 --

Get started with Real-Time Intelligence

-- 42 of 118 --

Unit 1 Introduction to Real-Time Intelligence in
Microsoft Fabric
Overview: This unit introduces the concept of Real-Time Intelligence within the Microsoft
Fabric ecosystem, focusing on its application in high-stakes operational environments like
logistics and delivery services.
1. The Business Problem: Batch vs. Real-Time
Traditional data processing often relies on batch reporting, where data is collected and
processed in intervals (e.g., overnight). In a delivery company scenario, this leads to
significant lag:
● Delayed Awareness: Issues like vehicle breakdowns or weather delays are only
identified after the fact.
● Information Gap: Customers remain uninformed about delays in real-time.
● Reactive Operations: Decisions are made based on old data rather than current
conditions.
2. The Solution: Microsoft Fabric Real-Time Intelligence
Real-Time Intelligence shifts the focus to data in motion. By analyzing streaming data as
events occur, organizations can achieve:
● Continuous Monitoring: Tracking GPS trackers, warehouse scanners, and
feedback systems instantly.
● Instant Analysis: Identifying route delays and estimating delivery windows based on
live conditions.
● Automated Workflows: Setting up customer notifications and route optimization
triggers automatically.
3. Key Learning Objectives
By the end of this module, you will understand how to:
Objective 	Description
Component Integration Understand how Microsoft Fabric components work together
for real-time solutions.
Data Lifecycle 	Learn to ingest, process, store, and query data as it arrives.

-- 43 of 118 --

Visualization &
Automation
Visualize "data in motion" and create automated responses to
changing conditions.
Unit 2 What is real-time data analytics?
Overview: This unit defines real-time analytics as the practice of processing and acting on
data as it is generated, typically within seconds or minutes. It highlights the shift from
analyzing static historical data to managing "data in motion."
1. Core Concepts: Events and Streams
● Events: Individual digital records of specific actions or changes (e.g., a website click,
a sensor reading, or a stock price change).
● Streams: A continuous, chronological sequence of events. Streams act as the
delivery mechanism that moves data from the source to the processing engine.
2. Essential Components of a Solution
To move from raw data to actionable insights, a real-time solution requires:
● Real-time Ingestion: Collecting data from diverse sources (logs, APIs, sensors)
simultaneously.
● Stream Processing: Transforming, filtering, and aggregating data while it is in
transit.
● Low-latency Storage: Databases optimized for high-velocity writes and near-instant
queries.
● Interactive Dashboards: Visualizations that update automatically as new data
arrives.
● Automated Decision Making: Triggers and rules that initiate alerts or workflows
based on live conditions.
3. Business Value
By implementing real-time analytics, organizations can:
● Respond Immediately: Act on emerging opportunities or threats without lag.
● Optimize Operations: Adjust resources dynamically based on current demand.
● Enhance Experience: Provide personalized, contextual interactions to customers.
● Prevent Issues: Detect anomalies and fix them before they escalate into critical
failures.

-- 44 of 118 --

4. Integration in Microsoft Fabric
Microsoft Fabric provides a unified platform for these tasks through:
● Eventstreams: For ingestion and transformation.
● Eventhouses: For optimized storage.
● Real-Time Hub: For data discovery.
● Activator: For automated alerts and actions.
Unit 3: Real-Time Intelligence in Microsoft Fabric
Overview: This unit explores the specific components within Microsoft Fabric that enable
end-to-end processing of streaming data, from initial capture to automated response.
1. Key Use Cases
Real-Time Intelligence is designed for scenarios where "near real-time" insights are critical:
● Delivery Tracking: Alerting customers about package delays via live vehicle
monitoring.
● Equipment Monitoring: Tracking sensor data (like temperature) to prevent
mechanical failure.
● Fraud Detection: Instantly blocking suspicious transactions.
● System Health: Monitoring application errors and website load times to maintain
service reliability.
2. Core Components of the Ecosystem
Microsoft Fabric uses a suite of integrated tools to manage the data lifecycle:

-- 45 of 118 --

Component 	Primary Function
Eventstreams 	Captures, filters, enriches, and transforms data as it flows into the
system.
Eventhouse 	Stores high-velocity time-series data in KQL databases, integrated with
OneLake.
KQL Queryset A workspace to run and manage Kusto Query Language (and T-SQL)
queries.
Real-Time
Dashboard
Provides auto-refreshing visualizations to monitor live conditions and
trends.
Activator 	Triggers automated actions (notifications or workflows) when specific
thresholds are met.
3. The Real-Time Hub
The Real-Time Hub acts as a central catalog for all "data-in-motion." It organizes data into
four main categories:
● Data Sources: Connectors for Microsoft, database CDC feeds, and external cloud
providers.
● Azure Sources: Direct configuration for IoT Hub, Service Bus, and Data Explorer.
● Fabric Events: Subscriptions to system events (e.g., job status changes or OneLake
file actions).
● Azure Events: Subscriptions to Azure service events (e.g., Blob Storage changes).
Unit 4: Ingest and transform real-time data
Overview: This unit focuses on the two primary methods for bringing streaming data into
Microsoft Fabric: using Eventstreams for active processing or Direct Ingestion for
high-velocity storage.
1. Eventstreams (In-Transit Transformation)
Eventstreams act like a "water pipe system" where data is processed while it is moving.

-- 46 of 118 --

● Sources: You can connect to Microsoft sources (Azure Event Hubs, IoT Hub),
Fabric/Azure events (OneLake changes), and External platforms (Apache Kafka,
MQTT).
● Transformations: Data can be cleaned or reshaped before storage using tools like
SQL code, filters, aggregations, and joins.
● Destinations: Processed data is routed to a KQL database, Lakehouse, Activator, or
custom endpoints.
2. Direct Ingestion (Post-Ingestion Transformation)
For scenarios requiring speed over immediate reshaping, data can be sent directly to a KQL
database in an Eventhouse.
● Sources: Direct ingestion supports local files, Azure Storage, Amazon S3, and
OneLake.
● Update Policies: Unlike Eventstreams, transformation happens after the data lands
in the database. Update policies are automated triggers that run a query to transform
newly arrived data and save it to a final destination table.
3. Comparison of Approaches
Feature 	Eventstreams 	Direct Ingestion
Transformation
Timing
Before data is stored (in-flight). After data lands (via Update
Policies).
Primary Tool 	Event Processor / SQL Editor. KQL Queries / Connectors.
Best For 	Complex routing and
multi-destination flows.
High-volume raw data storage
and rapid querying.
Unit 5: Store and query real-time data
Overview: This unit covers how to manage and analyze data once it lands in an
Eventhouse. It highlights the use of KQL Databases for storage and the Kusto Query
Language (KQL) for high-performance analysis.
1. Storage Components in an Eventhouse

-- 47 of 118 --

Within an Eventhouse, you work with two primary structures:
● KQL Databases: These are real-time optimized data stores that host tables, stored
functions, materialized views, and data streams.
● KQL Querysets: A dedicated space for writing and saving queries. These support
both KQL and a subset of T-SQL.
2. Kusto Query Language (KQL)
KQL is the primary language used for querying large volumes of structured and
semi-structured data. It is optimized for time-series data and uses a pipe-based (|) syntax.
Basic Syntax Example:
Code snippet
stock
| where ["time"] > ago(5m)
| summarize avgPrice = avg(todouble(bidPrice)) by symbol
● Performance: Data is indexed by ingestion time and partitioned automatically for
speed.
● Familiarity: If you aren't ready for KQL, you can use T-SQL (e.g., SELECT TOP 10
* FROM stock) or leverage Copilot to generate queries using natural language.
3. Advanced Automation & Tools
To go beyond simple queries, you can use Management Commands to automate data
processing:
● Update Policies: Automatically transform and move data into different tables as it
arrives.
● Materialized Views: Pre-calculate summary results so complex queries run faster.
● Stored Functions: Save and reuse frequently used query logic.
● Copilot for Real-Time Intelligence: An AI assistant that helps translate your
business questions into functional KQL code.
Unit 6: Visualize real-time data
Overview: This unit explains how to transform raw query results into actionable, visual
insights using Real-Time Dashboards and Power BI within the Microsoft Fabric
environment.

-- 48 of 118 --

1. Real-Time Dashboards
Real-Time Dashboards are single-page interfaces designed to show live data at a glance.
● Tiles: Dashboards are made of "tiles." Each tile runs a specific KQL query to extract
data from an Eventhouse.
● Interactivity: Once published, users can interact with tiles to drill deeper into data,
apply filters, or change the visualization type on the fly.
● Creation Methods: You can start a dashboard directly from a workspace or promote
a query from a KQL queryset into a dashboard tile.
2. Visualization via Power BI
For more traditional or complex reporting, Fabric allows you to build Power BI reports directly
from your KQL database.
● Seamless Integration: Power BI can connect to the KQL database to provide
high-level business analytics alongside streaming data.
● Rich Reporting: This is ideal for combining real-time metrics with historical business
data for a comprehensive overview.
3. Key Benefits
● Instant Visibility: No need to manually refresh; visualizations update as the data
changes.
● Customization: Edit tiles to show tables, charts, or graphs depending on what best
represents the data.
● Data Discovery: Use the visual interface to aggregate and explore "data in motion"
without writing additional code.

-- 49 of 118 --

Use Eventstream

-- 50 of 118 --

