This introductory unit highlights how Microsoft Fabric leverages the Delta Lake table format
to combine the best of both worlds: the power of relational databases and the flexibility of
data lakes.
Unit 1 Key Takeaways
● The Foundation: Tables in a Fabric lakehouse are based on the Linux Foundation
Delta Lake format, an open-source storage layer designed for Apache Spark.
● Relational Features on Big Data: Delta Lake enables "lakehouse" architecture by
providing:
○ ACID Transactions: Ensures data reliability during concurrent operations.
○ Schema Enforcement: Maintains data quality by preventing inconsistent
structures.
○ SQL Semantics: Allows for familiar data manipulation within a Spark
environment.
● Simplified Management: While Fabric manages much of the complexity for you,
Unit 1 emphasizes that understanding the metastore architecture and specialized
operations is key to building advanced analytics solutions.
Unit 2
of this module, Understand Delta Lake, explains the technical structure and benefits of
using Delta tables within a Microsoft Fabric lakehouse.
The Technical Structure
Delta tables are schema abstractions over data files. When you see the Delta (Δ) icon in the
Fabric UI, the underlying storage consists of:
● Parquet Files: The actual data stored in a compressed, columnar format.
● _delta_log Folder: A transaction log containing JSON files that track every change
made to the table.
Key Benefits of Delta Lake
The unit outlines five primary advantages of using this format:
● Relational Semantics: Supports standard CRUD operations (Create, Read, Update,
Delete). You can use INSERT, UPDATE, and DELETE just like in a traditional SQL
database.
● ACID Transactions: Ensures data reliability through Atomicity, Consistency,
Isolation, and Durability. This prevents data corruption during concurrent writes.
● Time Travel: Because every transaction is logged, you can access data versioning
to query previous states of a table or "travel back in time" to recover data.

-- 31 of 118 --

● Unified Batch & Streaming: Delta tables can act as both sources and sinks,
allowing the same table to handle real-time data streams and historical batch
processing simultaneously.
● Interoperability: Since the data is stored in the open Parquet format, it is highly
compatible with various engines. In Fabric, you can query these tables using the
SQL analytics endpoint.
Unit 3, Create delta tables,
focuses on the practical methods for defining and saving Delta tables within a Microsoft
Fabric lakehouse using Apache Spark.
1. Managed vs. External Tables
The unit distinguishes between how Fabric handles table data and metadata:
● Managed Tables: Both the metadata and the data files are managed by the Fabric
lakehouse. If you delete the table from the metastore, the underlying Parquet files are
also deleted.
● External Tables: The metadata is in the metastore, but the data is stored in a
separate location (like the Files folder or an external URL). Deleting the table
definition does not delete the actual data files.
2. Methods for Creating Tables
There are several ways to define a Delta table depending on your workflow:
Method 	Best For...
From a Dataframe 	Quickly saving processed data using
df.write.format("delta").saveAsTable("name").
DeltaTableBuilder
API
Programmatically defining a table schema (columns and types)
from scratch using Python.
Spark SQL 	Using familiar CREATE TABLE syntax, which is ideal for those
coming from a relational database background.
3. Saving Data in Delta Format
You can also save data in the Delta format without immediately defining a table in the
metastore. This is done by saving a dataframe to a specific path:

-- 32 of 118 --

● Overwrite Mode: Replaces existing data in the folder.
● Append Mode: Adds new rows to the existing data.
● Automatic Discovery: A unique Fabric "Tip" mentions that if you save Delta files
directly to the Tables folder in the lakehouse, Fabric will automatically discover
them and create the metadata for you.
Unit 4 - Use Delta Tables in Apache Spark
The Optimize delta tables module outlines how to manage and improve the performance of
Delta tables within Microsoft Fabric. It specifically focuses on overcoming the "small file
problem" caused by Spark's parallel processing and the immutable nature of Parquet files.
Here are the key features and techniques covered:
1. Performance Optimization Tools
● OptimizeWrite: A background feature that reduces the number of small files during
the write process. It is enabled by default in Fabric but can be toggled via Spark
configuration.
● OPTIMIZE Command: A manual maintenance task that consolidates existing small
Parquet files into larger, more efficient ones.
● V-Order: A Fabric-specific write optimization that sorts and compresses data to
enable "lightning-fast" reads. While it adds about 15% overhead to write times, it
significantly boosts read speeds for Power BI and SQL engines using Verti-Scan
technology.
2. Storage Management
● VACUUM: This command permanently deletes old Parquet data files that are no
longer referenced in the transaction log and fall outside the retention period (default
is 7 days).
○ Note: Running VACUUM prevents "time travel" to versions older than the
specified threshold.
3. Data Layout Strategy
● Partitioning: Organizing data into subfolders (e.g., by Year or Category) to enable
data skipping.
● Best Practices: * Use it for: Very large datasets with clear, low-cardinality filtering
columns.
○ Avoid it for: Small datasets or columns with high cardinality (too many
unique values), as this can actually worsen performance by creating too many
small files.
Summary Table: When to use what?

-- 33 of 118 --

Feature 	Primary Benefit 	When to Use
OptimizeWrite Prevents small files 	Always (enabled by default).
OPTIMIZE 	Consolidates existing
files
After large data loads or when query
performance drops.
V-Order 	Faster reads (Power
BI/SQL)
For tables that are read frequently by
reporting tools.
VACUUM 	Saves storage costs 	Regularly, to clean up obsolete data files.
Partitioning 	Speeds up filtered
queries
Only on very large tables with logical filter
columns.
Unit 5 - Use delta tables with streaming data
1. Using Spark SQL
The most common approach for working with Delta tables is through SQL commands.
● Integration: You can embed SQL statements within PySpark or Scala using
spark.sql().
● Notebook Magic: Use the %%sql magic command in Fabric notebooks to run native
SQL for tasks like INSERT or UPDATE.
2. Using the Delta Lake API
When working directly with file locations rather than catalog tables, the Delta Lake API is
often more efficient.
● Functionality: You can create a DeltaTable object using a file path.
● Programmatic Updates: It allows for structured updates and deletes, such as
applying a conditional price reduction across a specific category.

-- 34 of 118 --

3. Time Travel and Versioning
Delta Lake automatically logs every transaction, enabling "Time Travel" to view or restore
previous states of the data.
● History: Use the DESCRIBE HISTORY command to see a log of versions,
timestamps, and operations.
● Retrieving Past Data: You can load a specific version of a table into a DataFrame by
using:
○ versionAsOf: To access a specific version number (e.g., Version 0).
○ timestampAsOf: To access the data as it existed at a specific date and time.
Unit 6 - Work with Delta Lake tables
This unit focuses on using Delta tables as both sources and sinks within a Spark
Structured Streaming architecture in Microsoft Fabric.
Core Concepts
Spark Structured Streaming treats real-time data as a "boundless dataframe," allowing you
to process live data using the same APIs as static batch data.
● Streaming Source: Reading data from a Delta table as it is appended.
● Streaming Sink: Writing processed data streams into a Delta table for persistence
and further analysis.
Key Technical Workflows
1. Using Delta as a Source
When you use a Delta table as a source, Spark monitors the table's transaction log to
identify new data.
● Code Example:
● Python
stream_df = spark.readStream.format("delta").table("orders_in")
●
●
● Important Note: By default, Delta sources expect only append operations. If data is
deleted or updated in the source, you must use options like ignoreChanges or
ignoreDeletes to prevent errors.
2. Transforming the Stream
Once data is in a streaming DataFrame, you can apply standard Spark functions to filter or
modify it in real time (e.g., filtering NULL values or calculating new columns like Total price).

-- 35 of 118 --

3. Using Delta as a Sink
To save the streaming data, you define a Delta table as the output.
● Checkpoints: You must specify a checkpointLocation. This stores the state of the
stream, allowing it to resume exactly where it left off if a failure occurs.
● Code Example:
Python
deltastream = transformed_df.writeStream.format("delta") \
.option("checkpointLocation", checkpointpath) \
.start(output_table_path)
Summary Table
Feature 	Description
API 	Spark Structured Streaming
Latency 	Near real-time processing.
Reliability Managed via Checkpoints to track progress and recover from failures.
Lifecycle Streams must be explicitly stopped (using .stop()) to avoid ongoing compute
costs.

-- 36 of 118 --

Fabric lakehouse using medallion
architecture

-- 37 of 118 --

Unit 1 Organize a Fabric lakehouse using medallion architecture design
he Introduction - Training | Microsoft Learn page provides an overview of the medallion
architecture within the context of a Microsoft Fabric lakehouse.
Here is a summary of the key points:
Core Concept
The medallion architecture is an industry-standard design pattern used to organize, refine,
and curate data in a lakehouse environment. It allows businesses to blend the flexibility of
data lakes with the structured performance of data warehouses.
The Three Layers
The module introduces the logical flow of data through three distinct stages:
● Bronze: The raw data landing zone.
● Silver: Validated and enriched data.
● Gold: High-quality, business-ready data curated for reporting and analytics.
Unit 2 Describe medallion architecture
This unit from Microsoft Learn explains the medallion architecture, a data design pattern
used to logically organize a lakehouse into layers that increase in data quality and
refinement.
The Three Standard Layers
● Bronze (Raw): The initial landing zone. Data is stored in its original format
(structured or unstructured) without any modifications.
● Silver (Validated): Data is cleaned, merged, and deduplicated. It acts as a
consistent, "source of truth" repository accessible by multiple teams.
● Gold (Enriched): Data is further refined and aggregated to meet specific business
needs. This layer is optimized for analytics, data science, and reporting.
Moving Data in Microsoft Fabric
The unit distinguishes between two critical processes for moving data through these layers:
1. Data Transformation: Altering the structure or content.
○ Dataflows (Gen2): Best for smaller models and simple logic.
○ Notebooks: Best for large-scale data and complex transformations.
2. Data Orchestration: Managing the "flow" and timing of tasks.

-- 38 of 118 --

○ Pipelines: The primary tool used to schedule and automate the movement of
data from one layer to the next.
Key Takeaway
The medallion architecture is flexible. While the three-layer approach is standard,
organizations can add custom layers (like "Platinum") to suit specific requirements. It is
designed to work alongside existing data models, not replace them.

-- 39 of 118 --

Implement Real-Time Intelligence

-- 40 of 118 --

